---
published: false
layout: post
date: 2016-09-27 10:12:23
categories: post
tags: ad_tech safeframe friendly_iframe
---
Ads are almost everywhere on the Internet, and AdTech - the technology of advertising - is big business. Setting aside some bad practices in the industry, there's a lot of interesting engineering going on in here.

In this series of articles, I want to explore some of the bits and bobs of AdTech. I'm very much in a state of learning myself, so many of these things won't be authoritative. Many can't as most stuff is locked away under key and lock - the secret sauce powering colossal businesses.

One very pertinent issue is how are ads displayed on the page exactly?

What is an ad, more precisely? Most of them are little bits of text, or images, or a video, or an image with some animation. But besides these things, you have all sorts of ancilliary matter. Tracking pixels to know when an ad was shown, tracking code to see how an ad was shown exactly - if it entered the viewport, for how long was it shown, how was it interacted with etc. Code for meta-interactions, such as dismissing the ad, reporting innapropriate content, liking it / sharing it socially etc. Even the simplest have these things.
So, an ad, rather than being quite static content, is actually a small little app or applet.

[ Show examples of some common ads and how they operate ]

This ad is presented, most likely, as a bunch of HTML resources, the publisher page requests. But from request to display, there's a long journey. There are several approaches one can take.

The first, is for the code to be directly embedded in the page. This is simply like the ad being a part of the page - like the menus and images and links on a typical website.

The big advantage of this thing is speed - the resources are requested in the same download flow as the rest of the page. This is a pro if the page is fast, or a con if the page is slow. There is no real separation between the two contents. This mostly works for systems where both systems are owned end to end, such as Google's AdWords or Facebooks' Ads. Though it is employed in some cases in situations where the ad server is a third-party, like DoubleClick, AdZerk etc., if the particular ad demands it.

The con is that there is a very tight coupling between ad and page. If one cannot trust the source of the content, because it is third party, for example, even if it is served of the same server, you're essentially handling control of the page to the ad. This is terrible for many reasons. In most cases, the system would serve whatever "resource bundle" an advertiser would give it, rather than reference third party resources, so it's same-domain.

The second big axis is for the content to be inserted in the page, by some extra code. This traditionally is called "the tag", and is a little bit of JS inserted on the page, which makes a request to the ad server for the desired ads, and then receives them.

Speed suffers a little, as there's an extra flow involved. But for third party solutions, they can usually be much more optimized than your regular site.
The ad serving code can be served off a different domain, and be limited in its interactions.

Ad request usually happens through an AJAX or regular HTTP call. That's not very interesting in itself.

But then there's how the ad is placed on the page. There are essentially three approaches: direct embedding, friendly iframe and safeframe. [ add links ]


