---
published: false
---
This blog post describes Raynor, a small library I've recently released as open source software. While I've tried to make the docs be OK, this article serves as motivation and tutorial for it.

First, what's Raynor? It's a TypeScript library for marshalling objects. It allows you to do things like this:

```
class User {
    @MarshalWith(IdMarshaller)
    id: number;
    
    @MarshalWith(NameMarshaller)
    name: string;
    
    @MarshalWith(StringMarshaller)
    motto: string;
    
    @MarshalWith(MarshallerFrom(Point))
    homePosition: Point;
}

class Point {
    @MarshalWith(NumberMarshaller)
    x: number;
    
    @MarshalWith(NumberMarshaller)
    y: number;
}

const userMarshaller = new (MarshallerFrom(User));
const user: User = userMarshaller.extract({id: 1, name: 'John', motto: 'Sweet!', homePosition: {x: 10, y: 20}});
```

I wanted to mimick the annotation-driven approach encountered in other languages such as C# and Java.

Notice that the parameter to `extract` is an `Object`. Raynor doesn't really mess with the wire format. In most JavaScript applications this is going to be JSON. In most instances it is really straightforward to obtain and pass to the application. Deserialization failure can be handled separately. This way Raynor focuses on transforming a raw JavaScript value into something which conforms to the expectation of the application. Getting the raw JS value can be done via `JSON.parse` or the async `body.json()` etc.

I would say the "competition" is JsonSchema, RPC libraries such as Thrift, Protocol Buffers etc. as well as custom logic.

I want all of the object-local validation and transforming of the wire format to the application level object to be done in one place. After the transformation, one should be confident that the object handled is good. This applies more the "local" properties than "global" ones. For example, if a user has an email field, Raynor is good at making sure that that field actually _is_ an valid email according to the spec. It's not good at making sure the email actually exists, or can accept mail from the application etc. That's an application level-concern, and, doesn't have a right general answer. Which doesn't limit you though. If you want to send a test email as part of a marshaller, you can do that.

Many of the other alternatives focused on issues of transfer and structure. But that's just a small part of the story. The field `email: string` might be a string, but it is much more than that. Most other frameworks punt this verification to a later stage in the application. However, I think that's the most important bit. And it's good to have it all in a single place.

---
Why Raynor? Well, it's named after a famous _marshall_ of history.
